article-meson-v2.md, before:

---
title: "Meson Article Medium import v 2.1"
---
My Experience Using the Meson Build System Instead of Make
==========================================================
This article explores using [meson](https://mesonbuild.com/) to replace
[make](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Make_(software)) for building artifacts
from source code.  The artifacts include: executable programs, link libraries,
documentation, and test cases.

For a real-world, but simple, experiment I used my 
[Github: ringbuffer](https://github.com/dturvene/ring-buffer) repo using `C`
and [GNU Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/).  This is documented in my article 
[Ringbuffer in C](https://medium.com/@dturvene/a-portable-ringbuffer-implementation-in-c-5349c03a9c25).
I added a meson build framework: `meson.build` and supporting files.  I also added a 
`CMakeLists.txt` file for [cmake](https://cmake.org/) comparisons.

I also added an `rb.Dockerfile` [docker](https://www.docker.com/) configuration
to better manage/reproduce a stable environment and, finally, an
`rb-functions.sh` file containing shell functions illustrating the steps to
drive the docker container, build/test the executable using [make](),
[meson](), and [cmake](). 

The [make]() requirements I attempted to achieve using [meson]() include:

* flexible preprocessor and compiler arguments,
* compile and link rules (targets),
* automatic dependency list creation so if one of the dependency files changes 
  all files using it will be rebuilt,
* documentation, regression test and clean rules.

Why Meson?
----------
See [History]() for a deep-dive into build systems; it is a rabbit hole.

The reason I have stayed with [make]() for so long is once I figured out
a recipe for the different rules, it was a simple cut-and-paste for new
projects, and the makefile hierarchy scaled up well. Essentially I was not
clear how much effort would be necessary to switch to an alternative, 
and how much efficiency it would create.

Or possibly, I was just too lazy to look at the cmake, m4, java or groovy
manuals/tutorials and learn something new.

However, [QEMU]() is moving to [meson]() and I need to use QEMU so I
decided to see what's what with meson. Additionally, there are a large number
of [meson projects](https://mesonbuild.com/Users.html) using it, notably
[libvirt](https://libvirt.org/).  This means I have a large base of complicated
`meson.build` files to study. Yes, I am aware this is *also* true for cmake,
gradle, etc.

Additionally:

* It is feature-rich and flexible but seems to focus on C/C++ development.
* It is fairly easy to learn the grammar to replicate a simple project
  Makefile.  There is a good amount of documentation and user support.
* It is developed in [python 3](https://www.python.org/), which I find to be a
  great tool language.
* It is actively managed and developed. Since starting my study the meson stable
  tip has updated from 0.61.5 to 1.0.0.  I currently develop on Ubuntu 18.04,
  distributed with the very old meson 0.45.1 release.

History
-------
The [make](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Make_(software)) program was
originally developed sometime between Unix V1 (Ken Thompson circa 1969) and Unix
V6 (general released circa 1978.)  It has been enhanced a good deal, most
visibly by [GNU make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/) and 
[ccache](https://ccache.dev/). However, it retains many of the original design
requirements and decisions. Large projects using [make](), such as the 
[Linux kernel](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/), have organically created
makefile layers to the point of almost incomprehension.

A significant make implementation *must* use external executables to
perform necessary functions outside the scope of [make]().  See the shell,
perl, python and C support programs in `$K/scripts` called by various
makefiles. To inspect a real-world rule "gone bad" rule function see the
`cmd_gensymtypes_S` function in `$K/scripts/Makefile.build`.

The state of [make]() has prompted a number of efforts to produce a "better"
software build tool without losing its features and flexibility.  I
have used a large number of these build tools as a developer and end user
including [cmake](), gradle/groovy, maven, bazel, meson,
ninja, autotools. I am sure there are many more I have overlooked.

Of these [cmake]() is arguably the most prevalent for C/C++ development, and
the one I have used the most behind make. There is a cmake `CMakeLists.txt` in
the repo here for comparison to meson. It clearly influenced [meson]() goals
and some of its framework.  However, I did not use [cmake]() if [make]() was an
option.  I never found it to be as comprehensive as [make](). Easier? Yes.
More powerful? Sometimes. More flexible? No.  More intuitive? No.

Now layer on top of the these build tools a comparable package manager that:

1) collects the executable and supporting configuration files into a package,
2) installs the package files into a target filesystem, checking for compatible
dependencies in the target filesystem.

Package managers include dpkg/apt, yum, pacman, opkg.  I am sure there are many 
more I have overlooked.

*Then* on top of a package manager there is a framework to manage a set
of packages. There does not seem to be a common term for these guys or even a
common set of functions, but the most accurate term I have found is "Distro
Builder", which is what I will use here, with "Image Builder" as a close
second.  Possible functions for a distro builder are:

* gather a list of versioned packages, either locally or downloaded,
* gather the necessary build toolsuite *for the target architecture*, either
  locally or downloaded,
* explode each package into a scratch/work area,
* possibly install patch updates to a package,
* using the toolsuite, build the package into a build area,
* create a filesystem (possibly using `man:chroot` or ) and, using a comparable
  package manager, install each package into the filesystem.

Tools providing some/all of these functions include buildroot, google git-repo,
linux yocto, debian/canonical pbuilder/debootstrap/multistrap, openwrt image
builder. I am sure there are image builder functions I have overlooked.
I am sure there are many such tools I have overlooked.

Now that I have illustrated my view of the layers involved, let us look at
my experience with [meson]().

Meson Investigation
-------------------
It is immediately clear that [meson]() has benefitted from the significant
software development evolution since [make]() was created. This is apparent in
the  [meson design rationale](https://mesonbuild.com/Design-rationale.html).
Furthermore, it is solely based on [python 3]() with no other dependecies. 
The meson build files appear to be malleable and easily extendable.

One small example is automatic dependency checking, which must be hacked (in a 
number of ways) to make rules OR explicitly defined as a target prerequisite. 

[meson]() also has a comprehensive logging mechanism to review build steps AND
test steps. I have added this capabilty to my `makefiles` with
some work but it is not obvious.

The [meson]() documentation is extensive and growing.  I like the
[meson FAQ](https://mesonbuild.com/FAQ.html), 
[meson HOWTO](https://mesonbuild.com/howtox.html),
[meson in-depth tutorial](https://mesonbuild.com/IndepthTutorial.html)
pages.

Summary
-------
[meson]() is a great step forward from my casual experience but I need to
continue to research and expand my knowledge. The website has A LOT of
documentation that I still need to read.  I also need to explore the 
[ninja](https://ninja-build.org/) backend in a little more depth.

The big downside to [meson]() is it still is being developed so I need
up-to-date python and tools — best run in a docker container. It will not run
on my Ubuntu 18.04 laptop unless I install newer python and meson releases. 

I am also starting to use [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) which 
uses [cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch01-03-hello-cargo.html) for build 
and package manager support.
There is a [meson crate](https://docs.rs/meson/latest/meson/) but I have not
researched it yet.

Bottom line: [make]() is still used by many projects and I suppose I will
continue to have to know it, but I will use [meson]() as my preferred build
system.

Commit message:

mess around more with meson

article-meson-v2.md, after:

---
title: "Meson Article Medium import v 2.1"
---
My Experience Using the Meson Build System Instead of Make
==========================================================
This article explores using [meson](https://mesonbuild.com/) to replace
[make](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Make_(software)) for building artifacts
from source code.  The artifacts include: executable programs, link libraries,
documentation, and test cases.

For a real-world, but simple, experiment I used my 
[Github: ringbuffer](https://github.com/dturvene/ring-buffer) repo using `C`
and [GNU Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/).  This is documented in my article 
[Ringbuffer in C](https://medium.com/@dturvene/a-portable-ringbuffer-implementation-in-c-5349c03a9c25).
I added a meson build framework: `meson.build` and supporting files.  I also added a 
`CMakeLists.txt` file for [cmake](https://cmake.org/) comparisons.

I also added an `rb.Dockerfile` [docker](https://www.docker.com/) configuration
to better manage/reproduce a stable environment and, finally, an
`rb-functions.sh` file containing shell functions illustrating the steps to
drive the docker container, build/test the executable using [make](),
[meson](), and [cmake](). 

The [make]() requirements I attempted to achieve using [meson]() include:

* flexible preprocessor and compiler arguments,
* compile and link rules (targets),
* automatic dependency list creation so if one of the dependency files changes 
  all files using it will be rebuilt,
* documentation, regression test and clean rules.

Why Meson?
----------
See [History]() for a deep-dive into build systems; it is a rabbit hole.

The reason I have stayed with [make]() for so long is once I figured out
a recipe for the different rules, it was a simple cut-and-paste for new
projects, and the makefile hierarchy scaled up well. Essentially I was not
clear how much effort would be necessary to switch to an alternative, 
and how much efficiency it would create.

Or possibly, I was just too lazy to look at the cmake, m4, java or groovy
manuals/tutorials and learn something new.

However, [QEMU]() is moving to [meson]() and I need to use QEMU so I
decided to see what's what with meson. Additionally, there are a large number
of [meson projects](https://mesonbuild.com/Users.html) using it, notably
[libvirt](https://libvirt.org/).  This means I have a large base of complicated
`meson.build` files to study. Yes, I am aware this is *also* true for cmake,
gradle, etc.

Additionally:

* It is feature-rich and flexible but seems to focus on C/C++ development.
* It is fairly easy to learn the grammar to replicate a simple project
  Makefile.  There is a good amount of documentation and user support.
* It is developed in [python 3](https://www.python.org/), which I find to be a
  great tool language.
* It is actively managed and developed. Since starting my study the meson stable
  tip has updated from 0.61.5 to 1.0.0.  I currently develop on Ubuntu 18.04,
  distributed with the very old meson 0.45.1 release.

History
-------
The [make](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Make_(software)) program was
originally developed sometime between Unix V1 (Ken Thompson circa 1969) and Unix
V6 (general released circa 1978.)  It has been enhanced a good deal, most
visibly by [GNU make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/) and 
[ccache](https://ccache.dev/). However, it retains many of the original design
requirements and decisions. Large projects using [make](), such as the 
[Linux kernel](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/), have organically created
makefile layers to the point of almost incomprehension.

A significant make implementation *must* use external executables to
perform necessary functions outside the scope of [make]().  See the shell,
perl, python and C support programs in `$K/scripts` called by various
makefiles. To inspect a real-world rule "gone bad" rule function see the
`cmd_gensymtypes_S` function in `$K/scripts/Makefile.build`.

The state of [make]() has prompted a number of efforts to produce a "better"
software build tool without losing its features and flexibility.  I
have used a large number of these build tools as a developer and end user
including [cmake](), gradle/groovy, maven, bazel, meson,
ninja, autotools. I am sure there are many more I have overlooked.

Of these [cmake]() is arguably the most prevalent for C/C++ development, and
the one I have used the most behind make. There is a cmake `CMakeLists.txt` in
the repo here for comparison to meson. It clearly influenced [meson]() goals
and some of its framework.  However, I did not use [cmake]() if [make]() was an
option.  I never found it to be as comprehensive as [make](). Easier? Yes.
More powerful? Sometimes. More flexible? No.  More intuitive? No.

Now layer on top of the these build tools a comparable package manager that:

1) collects the executable and supporting configuration files into a package,
2) installs the package files into a target filesystem, checking for compatible
dependencies in the target filesystem.

Package managers include dpkg/apt, yum, pacman, opkg.  I am sure there are many 
more I have overlooked.

*Then* on top of a package manager there is a framework to manage a set
of packages. There does not seem to be a common term for these guys or even a
common set of functions, but the most accurate term I have found is "Distro
Builder", which is what I will use here, with "Image Builder" as a close
second.  Possible functions for a distro builder are:

* gather a list of versioned packages, either locally or downloaded,
* gather the necessary build toolsuite *for the target architecture*, either
  locally or downloaded,
* explode each package into a scratch/work area,
* possibly install patch updates to a package,
* using the toolsuite, build the package into a build area,
* create a filesystem (possibly using `man:chroot` or ) and, using a comparable
  package manager, install each package into the filesystem.

Tools providing some/all of these functions include buildroot, google git-repo,
linux yocto, debian/canonical pbuilder/debootstrap/multistrap, openwrt image
builder. I am sure there are image builder functions I have overlooked.
I am sure there are many such tools I have overlooked.

Now that I have illustrated my view of the layers involved, let us look at
my experience with [meson]().

Meson Investigation
-------------------
It is immediately clear that [meson]() has benefitted from the significant
software development evolution since [make]() was created. This is apparent in
the  [meson design rationale](https://mesonbuild.com/Design-rationale.html).
Furthermore, it is solely based on [python 3]() with no other dependecies. 
The meson build files appear to be malleable and easily extendable.

A small example is automatic dependency checking, which must be hacked (in a 
number of ways) to make rules OR explicitly defined as a target prerequisite.

One big headache I have avoided in the past is the 
[autoconf](https://www.gnu.org/software/autoconf/autoconf.html) tool.  It is a
large number of M4 macros that inspect the build system for capabilities and, from
this, produces scripts that eventually create a Makefile tuned to the target
system. I know very little about [autoconf]() and hope never to have to learn
more than running the necessary command that magically creates a Makefile.

[meson]() cleanly integrates the [autoconf]() capability into an initial build
step using `compiler.CompilerHolder` python methods to define flags, header
files, functions, word size, etc.  I have not studied the python scripts in detail yet but
they appear to be well-written and use standard patterns (e.g. `mixin`).

[meson]() also has a comprehensive logging mechanism to review build steps AND
test steps. I have added this capabilty to my `makefiles` with
some work but it is not obvious.

The [meson]() documentation is extensive and growing.  I like the
[meson FAQ](https://mesonbuild.com/FAQ.html), 
[meson HOWTO](https://mesonbuild.com/howtox.html),
[meson in-depth tutorial](https://mesonbuild.com/IndepthTutorial.html)
pages.

Summary
-------
[meson]() is a great step forward from my casual experience but I need to
continue to research and expand my knowledge. The website has A LOT of
documentation that I still need to read.  I also need to explore the 
[ninja](https://ninja-build.org/) backend in a little more depth.

The big downside to [meson]() is it still is being developed so I need
up-to-date python and tools — best run in a docker container. It will not run
on my Ubuntu 18.04 laptop unless I install newer python and meson releases. 

I am also starting to use [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) which 
uses [cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch01-03-hello-cargo.html) for build 
and package manager support.
There is a [meson crate](https://docs.rs/meson/latest/meson/) but I have not
researched it yet.

Bottom line: [make]() is still used by many projects and I suppose I will
continue to have to know it, but I will use [meson]() as my preferred build
system.
